What Is Node.js?
Node.js is an event-based, non-blocking, asynchronous I/O runtime that uses Google’s V8 JavaScript engine and libuv library.
Node Is Built on Google Chrome’s V8 JavaScript Engine
The V8 engine is the open-source JavaScript engine that runs in Google Chrome and other Chromium-based web browsers, including Brave, Opera, and Vivaldi. It was designed with performance in mind and is responsible for compiling JavaScript directly to native machine code that your computer can execute.
However, when we say that Node is built on the V8 engine, we don’t mean that Node programs are executed in a browser. They aren’t. Rather, the creator of Node (Ryan Dahl) took the V8 engine and enhanced it with various features, such as a file system API, an HTTP library, and a number of operating system–related utility methods.
This means that Node.js is a program we can use to execute JavaScript on our computers. In other words, it’s a JavaScript runtime.
What Is Node.js Used For?
These build tools come in all shapes and sizes, and you won’t get far in a modern JavaScript landscape without bumping into them. They can be used for anything from bundling your JavaScript files and dependencies into static assets, to running tests, or automatic code linting and style checking.
And if you want to start developing apps with any modern JavaScript framework (for example, React or Angular), you’ll be expected to have a working knowledge of Node and npm (or maybe Yarn). This isn’t because you need a Node back end to run these frameworks. You don’t. Rather, it’s because these frameworks (and many, many related packages) are all available via npm and rely on Node to create a sensible development environment in which they can run.
Node.js Lets Us Run JavaScript on the Server
Next we come to one of the biggest use cases for Node.js — running JavaScript on the server. This isn’t a new concept, and was first attempted by Netscape way back in 1994. Node.js, however, is the first implementation to gain any real traction, and it provides some unique benefits, compared to traditional languages. Node now plays a critical role in the technology stack of many high-profile companies. Let’s have a look at what those benefits are.
The Node.js Execution Model
In very simplistic terms, when you connect to a traditional server, such as Apache, it will spawn a new thread to handle the request. In a language such as PHP or Ruby, any subsequent I/O operations (for example, interacting with a database) block the execution of your code until the operation has completed. That is, the server has to wait for the database lookup to complete before it can move on to processing the result. If new requests come in while this is happening, the server will spawn new threads to deal with them. This is potentially inefficient, as a large number of threads can cause a system to become sluggish — and, in the worst case, for the site to go down. The most common way to support more connections is to add more servers.
Node.js, however, is single-threaded. It’s also event-driven, which means that everything that happens in Node is in reaction to an event. For example, when a new request comes in (one kind of event) the server will start processing it. If it then encounters a blocking I/O operation, instead of waiting for this to complete, it will register a callback before continuing to process the next event. When the I/O operation has finished (another kind of event), the server will execute the callback and continue working on the original request. Under the hood, Node uses the libuv library to implement this asynchronous (that is, non-blocking) behavior.
Node’s execution model causes the server very little overhead, and consequently it’s capable of handling a large number of simultaneous connections. The traditional approach to scaling a Node app is to clone it and have the cloned instances share the workload. Node.js even has a built-in module to help you implement a cloning strategy on a single server.
What Are the Advantages of Node.js?
Aside from speed and scalability, an often-touted advantage of using JavaScript on a web server — as well as in the browser — is that your brain no longer needs to switch modes. You can do everything in the same language, which, as a developer, makes you more productive (and hopefully, happier). For example, you can easily share code between the server and the client.
Another of Node’s big pluses is that it speaks JSON. JSON is probably the most important data exchange format on the Web, and the lingua franca for interacting with object databases (such as MongoDB). JSON is ideally suited for consumption by a JavaScript program, meaning that when you’re working with Node, data can flow neatly between layers without the need for reformatting. You can have one syntax from browser to server to database.
Other Uses of Node
And it doesn’t stop at the server. There are many other exciting and varied uses of Node.js!
For example it can be used as a scripting language to automate repetitive or error prone tasks on your PC. It can also be used to write your own command line tool, such as this Yeoman-Style generator to scaffold out new projects.

6 Reasons for Pair Programming
erative loops. Code reviews. Fast feedback. Error checking and linting. These are software engineering practices that have proven to dramatically improve the quality of code developers produce. What if you can could get all of this, instantaneously, while typing code line by line and character by character? You can, with pair programming, a technique common to many agile work environments.
How does pair programming work?
While there are many different styles, pair programming commonly involves two roles: the Driver and the Navigator. The Driver is the programmer who is typing and the only one whose hands are on the keyboard. Handling the “mechanics” of coding, the Driver manages the text editor, switching files, version control, and—of course writing—code. The Navigator uses their words to guide the Driver but does not provide any direct input to the computer. The Navigator thinks about the big picture, what comes next, how an algorithm might be converted in to code, while scanning for typos or bugs. The Navigator might also utilize their computer as a second screen to look up solutions and documentation, but should not be writing any code.
Why pair program?
While learning to code, developers likely study several programming languages. Similar to a foreign language class, there are four fundamental skills that help anyone learn a new language: Listening: hearing and interpreting the vocabulary Speaking: using the correct words to communicate an idea Reading: understanding what written language intends to convey Writing: producing from scratch a meaningful
Pair programming touches on all four skills: developers explain out loud what the code should do, listen to others’ guidance, read code that others have written, and write code themselves.
During a five-hour paired lab session, Code Fellows students work on all four of these language-specific skills. The abilities they foster will serve them well in completing assignments, in their own communication and learning, in interviews, and in readiness for a job at a company that utilizes this agile practice.
Wow, all that? Let’s take a look!
1. Greater efficiency
It is a common misconception that pair programming takes a lot longer and is less efficient. In reality, when two people focus on the same code base, it is easier to catch mistakes in the making. Research indicates that pair programing takes slightly longer, but produces higher-quality code that doesn’t require later effort in troubleshooting and debugging (let alone exposing users to a broken product). So, in the long-run, it’s often actually more efficient than two people working on separate features. When coming up with ideas and discussing solutions out loud, two programmers may come to a solution faster than one programmer on their own. Also, when the pair is stuck, both programmers can research the problem and reach a solution faster. Researches also identified pairing enhances technical skills, team communication, and even enjoyability of coding in the workplace.
2. Engaged collaboration
When two programmers focus on the same code, the experience is more engaging and both programmers are more focused than if they were working alone. It is harder to procrastinate or get off track when someone else is relying on you to complete the work. Popping open your Facebook timeline is just that less enticing when someone else is looking at your screen.
Another important aspect of learning to program is knowing when to ask for help. We advise our students to spend no more than fifteen minutes stuck on a problem before asking a teaching assistant or instructor for help. When developers pair program, they rely more on each other and can often find a solution together without needing to ask for additional help. Ultimately, this boosts overall confidence.
3. Learning from fellow students
Everyone has a different approach to problem solving; working with a teammate can expose developers to techniques they otherwise would not have thought of. If one developer has a unique approach to a specific problem, pair programming exposes the other developer to a new solution.
Often times, the developers in a pairing have different skill sets. If one programmer is more experienced in a certain skill, they can teach a student who is less familiar with that area. The less experienced developer benefits from the experienced developer’s knowledge and guidance, and the latter benefits from explaining the topic in their own words, further solidifying their own understanding.
4. Social skills
Pair programming is great for improving social skills. When working with someone who has a different coding style, communication is key. This can become more difficult when two programmers have different personalities. Pair programming not only improves programming skills, but can also help programmers develop their interpersonal skills. When just grabbing the keyboard and taking over isn’t an option, getting good at finding the right words is a skill unto itself.
This has long-term career impacts. As much as employers want strong programmers, they know it’s essential to hire people who can work well with others.
5. Job interview readiness
A common step in many interview processes involves pair programming between a current employee and an applicant, either in person or through a shared screen. They will carry out exercises together, such as code challenges, building a project or feature, or debugging an existing code base. By doing so, companies can get a better feel for how an applicant will fit into the team and their collaboration style.
For most roles, the ability to work with and learn from others and stellar communication skills are as (or more!) important to a company than specific technical skills. Pair programming strengthens all of those skills.
6. Work environment readiness
Many companies that utilize pair programing expect to train fresh hires from CS-degree programs on how they operate to actually deliver a product. Code Fellows graduates who are already familiar with how pairing works can hit the ground running at a new job, with one less hurdle to overcome.
